# Research

**Democracy, even if you dislike it - Does the political impact of female suffrage depend on its environment?**

Institutions and their environment both shape political outcomes. Identifying their independent effect empirically is however difficult, because institutions are likely to self-select into context, and the context itself could be affected by institutions. I exploit quasi-random local franchise extensions to Swiss women in the late 20th century to empirically identify the political impact of female suffrage in two opposing environments: Municipalities with a male majority in favour of women's vote and municipalities with a male majority against it. In both contexts, I find that left and liberal parties in local elections lose and populists gain as female suffrage is introduced. In a simple ecological analysis, I find only weak evidence that this shift can be explained through how women vote. Instead, my results cautiously suggest a political backlash reaction of men. This paper therefore contributes to our understanding of how well democratic institutions function within environments that welcome versus reject them.

**Does female suffrage change men's support for women's vote, and how?**

Institutions and their environment both shape political outcomes. Identifying their independent effect empirically is however difficult, because institutions are likely to self-select into context, and the context itself could be affected by institutions. I exploit quasi-random local franchise extensions to Swiss women in the late 20th century to empirically identify the political impact of female suffrage in two opposing environments: Municipalities with a male majority in favour of women's vote and municipalities with a male majority against it. In both contexts, I find that left and liberal parties in local elections lose and populists gain as female suffrage is introduced. In a simple ecological analysis, I find only weak evidence that this shift can be explained through how women vote. Instead, my results cautiously suggest a political backlash reaction of men. This paper therefore contributes to our understanding of how well democratic institutions function within environments that welcome versus reject them.

**A Quality-based Explanation for the Incumbency Curse** *with Hugo Reichhardt and Greg Sheen*

In her AJPS article from 2015, O'Brien suggests to have found evidence for gender bias in political party leadership. Using a duration model, she shows that (1) the expected time until the rst female party leader is elected increases in the party's electoral performance, and (2) that male party leaders survive on average longer than female leaders when their party is performing badly, but shorter when their party is performing well. This, she suggests, shows that women's leadership undergoes more scrutiny than men's. In this short-note, we challenge O'Brien's interpretation of her findings based on four arguments: One, much of her explained variation in electing the first female leader comes from electing a new leader after bad election results. Two, she fails to provide evidence for discrimination exclusively on the grounds of sex and we find that we cannot reject the null of no gender dierence in the chance of being elected
as new party leader. Three, her method of assigning the most recent election result to current leaders inaccurately associates new leaders with past leaders' performance, introducing invalid comparisons. Four, she proposes to control for parties' trajectories, but only holds the most recent election performance constant. This neglects diering trends in parties' popularity among voters.

**A Quality-based Explanation for the Incumbency Curse** *with Hugo Reichhardt and Greg Sheen*

In their APSR article, Klasnja and Titiunik (2017) report a strong electoral disadvantage incumbent parties face in weak party environments like Brazil. As explanation, they propose a theory where voters punish parties who failed to discipline their lame duck incumbents. In this research note, we argue that KT misinterpret their finding and instead identify what Eggers (2017) introduced as quality-based incumbency effect. We combine empirical evidence from a replicated sample of KT's data with a model on candidate selection by Carrillo and Mariotti (2001) to support our case. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first article to provide empirical
evidence for the theoretical framework brought forward by Eggers (2017).

Back to [Home page](/README.md)
